Why Pet Abandonment Is Rising: What Happens When You Give Up Your Pet? | Talking Point
CNA Insider, 2024 — YouTube video M8JgfWu290g (23:27)
Transcript reconstructed from auto-generated subtitles.

This is what Ace sees every day. He's a four-year-old dog. His owners left him here at the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, also known as the SPCA. Pet abandonment often makes the news. According to figures from the SPCA, they attended to 285 cases of pet abandonment in 2023, up by over 190 per cent from the year before. But that's just the tip of the iceberg. What's not reported is the number of animals surrendered to our overcrowded shelters. In this episode, I want to find out why this is happening, and what happens to your pet when you give it up.

This is the Royal Animal Rescue, Singapore's only pet emergency ambulance service, which I'm told also attends to cases of abandonment.

"Just a few months ago, it was maybe we get one case a month. But in this past couple of months, we've been getting maybe one to two calls per week."

Wow, one to two calls per week.

"Yes. So even if it's one call a week, we're looking at four times the usual number. Yes, it's quite bad. It actually ranges from dogs to cats to even birds, hamsters, guinea pigs and rabbits as well."

What was the worst case of abandoned pet that you ever attended to?

"We attended to a pet cat that was abandoned. So the fur was all matted up. Its claws were also too long to the point where it was actually peeling off the skin. It also had open wounds because of some skin infections as well. It was an emergency case because the cat's health was deteriorating rapidly."

Take me through what happens when you receive a call to rescue an abandoned pet.

"So normally, a member of the public will actually give our 24-hour hotline a call. The dispatcher would then see how severe the case is, and they will assess the situation via video call. And then, based on the severity of the case, dispatch our ambulance over to respond to the animal. Then we'll bring it to a shelter, SPCA, a shelter that we work closely with. Just last week, they mentioned to us that they only have three slots available for abandoned cats. They are really struggling at the moment, and people that are surrendering pets is also causing them to struggle. So people who own pets, most of the time when the pets get sick or they get old and they cannot financially commit to the animal anymore, they tend to surrender these animals to the shelter."

Apart from the SPCA, there are 10 other shelters that take in unwanted pets. So here I am at Singapore's largest animal shelter facility, the Animal Lodge, located in the western part of Singapore.

Hi, are you a volunteer?

"Oh, yes. I'm a volunteer."

And these dogs are from the shelter?

"Yes. This one is Carlit, and the other one is Jade. But they are quite shy."

This place reminds me a little of a dormitory. The volunteer told me that those two dogs have been here for at least five years, and there is only a very slim chance that they will get adopted ever because, you know, they're just not cute and fluffy.

Terry, how full is your shelter now?

"Well, we've been at about 90 to 95 per cent for the last 20 odd years since we've been operating, and we usually leave the last five per cent to 10 per cent for emergency cases."

Help me to understand this. If you are running at full capacity for the last 20 years, how do new pets even come in?

"The new pets only come in after we have adoptions, the death of a senior, because for our cats and dogs, we take care of them for life, so we do not euthanise them."

How many requests for surrender do you get?

"As little as one, as many as 30 a week."

30 a week? That is insane. What period was that that you got 30 requests?

"This was shortly after the work-from-home phase during COVID-19 came up."

Oh, my goodness.

"Hey Marcus, hi. Come on in, thank you."

How full is your shelter now?

"Currently at the moment, we have 12 kennels, and we are running at full capacity."

How many surrender requests do you get a week?

"In a week, we get about four to five requests."

So what happens when dog owners come in here and you are already full?

"We always have to turn them away. We have no choice because we are full. That is a very challenging part of what we do as a volunteer because it's very hard to say no, but it is what it is."

Are you running at full capacity?

"Oh, yeah, very much. It's been like that for the longest time."

How often do you get requests for pet surrender?

"Almost every day, we get requests for pet surrender, and some of them threaten to abandon the animals if we don't see to their requests."

Let me guess, you are also running at full capacity.

"Yes, we are almost always at full capacity. At the shelter, we have about 60 dogs that we can take in at any one time, and we are always at like 95 per cent to 100 per cent. It's definitely more than we can handle."

The shelters are trying their best, but it's hard not to see these kennels and spaces as prison cells. The facilities rely heavily on volunteers to help walk the dogs. Otherwise, these animals will be caged up all day to prevent them from escaping or hurting each other. Imagine staying in your little kennel surrounded by three walls and a metal gate all day.

I've been told that one of the reasons people give up their pets is because they can't afford to pay the medical bills. And volunteers like Joanne are noticing a worrying trend, resulting in pets needing more medical care than ever before.

"A lot of these cats we've seen, they might have health issues, some sort of genetic defects."

I am at a photo shoot with cat rescuer Joanne Cheong.

"This is Marmite. He's up for adoption, so I'm trying to photograph him for his adoption pictures."

She rescues strays and cats that have been abandoned. Over the past seven years, she's managed to rehome nearly 100 cats.

"Marmite and his sibling Marmalade was rescued from Tuas. So we suspect that they are actually offsprings of an abandoned cat."

So when an owner abandons an animal that is not rescued, in a way, the problem doesn't just end there. These abandoned animals might just go off to have offspring.

"Yes, and then we are going to get more stray animals. Yes, because we find that usually, a lot of abandonment cases, we do see that they are not sterilised. So how they actually start breeding."

Yeah, then you'll find young kittens like these that need rescuing. Oh my gosh, photographing a cat is a lot harder than I think. Do you get it? Do you get it? I got one shot, I think. Let me see, let me see, let me see, let me see.

"Basically, we've taken in about 10 cats within two weeks. It's about twice what we usually see."

Behind this increase in the number of people giving up their cats is a worrying trend.

"So that's another reason why people give up their cats. Let me show you, I need my phone for this. In Singapore, you need to have a licence to breed animals. And these people, they don't have a licence to breed these cats, so that's why they're known as backyard breeders."

So what you were saying is that these aren't pet shops?

"Yes, they breed at home."

Oh gosh, these are all pictures of kittens. Oh, so cute.

"Yeah, exactly. It's so cute, right? And then that's when you will be attracted to buy from them."

This makes it so real because I'm looking at this cute little thing. It has a name. It even has a date of birth.

"Yes, and it has a breed. She's adorable. So if you can see here, they told me the price is 1k. Usually, the purebred cats will cost about 3,000 at a minimum."

So 1k is cheap for like a purebred cat, right?

"If we look further down, when I ask them, 'Where can I go and view the kitten?', they won't tell me specific unit numbers, and then we will most likely meet at the void deck."

So there is no traceability to the actual identities.

"Yes. So I suspect that about 30 to 40 per cent of the cats that I have rescued before were actually from backyard breeders."

How do these illegal breeders contribute to pet abandonment and surrendering?

"So these backyard breeders, they sell their cats so easily, and there's a low barrier of entry. They don't have to do any home screening. So the people who buy these cats tend to have a more casual attitude towards pet ownership. So they are more likely to, you know, once they think that the cats are no longer cute, they'll dump them out, or they will just give them away. Another reason also, a lot of these cats, they might have health issues, you know, some sort of genetic defects, because usually backyard breeders don't do genetic checks. Perhaps like, you know, reputable breeders, they do checkups, make sure that, you know, genetically, maybe the cats are healthy to breed."

So it seems like the cheaper pedigree cat that you bought from an illegal breeder might actually end up costing you more because of health reasons.

"Definitely."

One thing that stuck with me after talking to Joanne is the cost that comes with owning a pet. Prices vary based on the species and breed. Take a small Chihuahua as an example. Buying it from a pet store could cost you around 4,500 Singapore dollars. Dog food about 80 dollars a month. Basic grooming packages up to 140 dollars or more per visit. This is not including medical fees, which have gone up by as much as 20 per cent over the last two years.

"Hi Diana, I'm treating a cat with an ear infection."

So for a case like this, how much is the consult as well as the medication going to cost the owner?

"The cost has increased over the years. So 10 years ago, for a consult, the actual test and medication would cost around 70 to 100. Now it has almost doubled, so it can cost 140 to, in certain cases, maybe near 200."

Can this cost balloon, and how?

"I recall one moment where a dog came into a consult, bleeding from the mouth, and we thought that the dog had an infected tooth. We did a procedure to try to extract the tooth, but unfortunately, we actually found a tumour that was bleeding in it. And the bill went up to more than 5,000. And currently, the dog's actually receiving chemotherapy for the cancer, so there's like ongoing costs. When a kitten is cute and cuddly, it's very much easier and lower cost to care for it. But as the pet ages, the healthcare cost is bound to increase as well."

Do you find from experience that people start either giving up the pet or abandoning the pet when that happens?

"Unfortunately, there were instances where such things happened. In another clinic, there was once where a senior pet was just left at the reception, and the human just disappeared."

What about your clinic? Has something like this happened before where the pet owner says, 'Please just take my animal'?

"Over the last two years, it happened four times. But to give the pet owner credit, they were trying to figure out other methods, and that was the last resort. So there was a cat that got hit by a car and broke both of his back legs. The solution is to do surgery to fix both back legs. Unfortunately, it can amount to 5,000 to 6,000, and the person just couldn't afford the surgery. The very realistic view of it is that the pet will grow old and, similar to humans, as the pet grows older, there will be certain diseases we need to deal with. And good medicine is expensive."

Remember Ace? This is his view from within his kennel. This is how a typical kennel looks like. Ace was surrendered by his owner because of something called food guarding behaviour. This is when a pet gets protective over his food, and can sometimes act aggressively towards humans. Attempts to get him adopted so far have failed. To improve his chances, staff have been training Ace to socialise with both dogs and humans at the shelter. Would this help him find a permanent home?

Hello, Ace. Wow, he took that as a command to sit. Good boy.

"So this is Ace's morning routine. You would realise it's a bit Blair Witch Project because he gets very excited with the people that he likes. He's waiting to be let out because they've started the cleaning routine already."

This was heartbreaking for me because I don't see things from this perspective. Their entire life really is within this area.

"So the only thing we can do is to find them homes fast enough."

Does he have any friends in the shelter?

"His best friend is actually a human, which is our staff, YiLing. He adores her. In fact, when YiLing is around, we have to be really mindful because all the energy and love is for her. So they've developed a very strong attachment for each other. But he's made so much progress. If he gets to a home, it'll be even better because then you can really start the entire socialisation process."

That was heartbreaking, that last bit for me, just to realise that when we all go back home, they're here, and we can't have our staff sitting here 24/7. They also need to go back home, and it's hard to see it from the animal's perspective. Do you think that he will ever find a home?

"He is a lovely dog. I want to say yes, but there's so many animals looking for homes. So I'm hopeful still, but it will take some time. And any day an animal has to spend in a shelter, no matter how much we love them, no matter how safe we will keep them, it is still a day away from a forever home. A place where they can exercise their freedom, be themselves, be with people who can spend a lot more time with them."

Regardless of how kind you guys are to them, it doesn't take away the fact that they live in a prison-like condition, and I don't think pet owners realise that.

"We try our best. We make sure it's clean, it's secure, but, you know, the bars, we just cannot do anything about it. Because you want to make sure you prevent fights between animals, make sure that they don't escape."

How long has your longest resident been here?

"The longest resident who has been in the shelter is Cliff, who just celebrated his 10th birthday with us last October. He's been with us since he was a puppy."

It sounds like a horrible question, but do you think Cliff is going to die here at the shelter?

"I really don't know. Unfortunately, we have many such cases."

What more can be done to stop people from giving up their pets in the first place?

"I think a lot of people, even during COVID, who bought pets on a whim. And I think when you buy pets, the education at point of sale is so important. It's another family member they're bringing into your life, and there are commitments that you need to be aware of."

Do you think at the pet purchasing level enough is being done to make sure that potential pet owners are being counselled?

"I think pet shops are doing the bare minimum at this juncture. Firstly, an adoption counselling, as you would have it in an animal welfare organisation, is quite different from a mandatory briefing that is provided in a pet shop. In a shelter environment, we can actually reject someone and say that, 'No, I don't think that this particular dog is suited to you.' For example, for Ace, we know that he wouldn't do well in certain settings. We ask a lot more questions. The second is in terms of transparency, sharing about any potential medical conditions that these animals may already have in a litter that they have in a pet shop. It is likely that one or two of them may not be as healthy as the others. Are they really sharing all of those health concerns with someone who is, you know, going to buy a dog? And my last concern is really about whether breed-specific care is being communicated. For example, if you want to now get a Husky, you need to make sure that you understand that there are certain conditions, there is a certain level of comfort that you want to provide the animal. So often we hear from pet owners that they were not told all of these things at the point of buying."

That said, pet shops are subject to some guidelines. They aren't allowed to sell pets, such as dogs, cats and rabbits, to anyone under 16. Both the pet shop and buyer must also sign a Pet Purchase Declaration form, which includes a checklist that pet shops must use to screen buyers on their suitability to own a pet. But how thorough are these checks? There's only one way to find out.

We're sending in an undercover. She's Chloe, and she will be helping us to find out.

"Hello, one, two, three. Okay, hello. Yeah, I'm interested in getting a puppy or a dog. So what's the step-by-step procedure if, let's say, I want to get a dog today?"

Pet shop staff: "If, let's say, you're going to get a dog today and you want to bring it home today also, okay. All you need to do is just provide us with your details. You can bring home the puppy today."

"Just bring home the puppy?" — "Yes."

"Do I need to declare my experience or like...?" — "No need."

Another shop: "Before we release the puppy, we need all these details. For example, do you have a history of taking care of dogs, how do you take care of them, and then you can consider before buying?"

"Okay, so what if I don't hit one of the requirements? Let's say I'm not very sure about certain things, will you still be able to sell me the puppy?" — "Of course. That's why we're informing you, we need to educate you."

"Do I need to declare anything, how many dogs I have?" — "Not necessary. You just have to do a licence transfer online to your name." — "That's all?" — "Yeah. The dog is ready to leave anytime, as long as your home is ready."

"Do you have a checklist, or requirements that you need to fulfil before you sell me the dogs?" — "No, as long as you're above 18."

All 10 pet shops Chloe visited were willing to sell her a pet the same day. While five of them did try guiding her on how to look after the pet, for some, the entire transaction took just minutes.

So this is Ace. He's a happy camper because this is one of his two walks a day. Now, every day that Ace spends at a shelter lowers his chances of getting adopted, because people tend to prefer to adopt younger animals, and I don't really want to see him live out the rest of his life at a shelter. So if you want to adopt Ace, please contact the SPCA. The details are at the bottom of the screen. I think he's hungry. Ace, Ace, good boy.
