Top 10 Worst Dog Breeds For First Time Puppy Owners
McCann Dog Training (YouTube cuDfystslho) - reconstructed transcript

Today I have been given a list of the top 10 breeds that you should never have if you're a first time dog owner, and you're going to see my honest reaction based on my 25 years of being a professional dog trainer and seeing about 500 dogs a week in our classes. So I have a pretty wide pool of dogs to come up with a bit of a judgment. Now, at the end of this top 10 list, if there's any breeds that I feel should have been on the list, I'm going to make sure I let you know about them because you deserve to know I'm Kayl. Welcome back to McCann Dogs. Let's get into it.

So I haven't had a chance to see this list ahead of time. I've been fed the list to see what my reaction is. So bear with me here. So number 10 on the list is an Airedale Terrier already have some things to say to you. It says here, known for their intelligence and intelligence and independence and Airedale Terriers can be stubborn, mischievous, and require consistent training and supervision.

Okay, I agree with all of those things and what is absolutely hysterical about Airedale Terrier being number 10 on this list is they were actually my parent's First Dog and Airedale Terriers are the reason why McCann dogs exists in the first place. But all of these things are very, very true. Airedale Terriers, as a rule, are very independent. They are very stubborn and they are a challenge to train, and my parents can attest to that and it's one of the reasons why they decided to go to dog training classes themselves way back in the day and get some good basic training on. Now, they were super successful with their Airedale Terriers.

They had the number one and number two top obedience dogs in Canada in the US for years with Airedales, which was very, very impressive. But yeah, I wouldn't say that they would be a great first time dog owner. Dog owner's choice, definitely a bit more on the stubborn side, but I mean, if you play your cards right, maybe they could lead to something great in the future. Coming in number nine, Weimaraner. The list says these energetic dogs need significant exercise and mental stimulation.

Without it, they can become destructive and develop behavioral issues. Now really I feel that this explanation could be for any type of breed, but for Weimaraner specifically, I can't say that I disagree with what they say about it. Would it be good for a first time dog owner? Yes and no because I've seen a very different, quite a wide range of personality types and temperament types in the Weimaraner or some dogs, some Weims are really sort of big and bold and powerful and independent, bit pushy, which can be challenging for somebody who's never trained a dog before. But I've also seen some really sweet and cooperative ones that have done very, very well.

Again, all of this from where I'm seeing them is with training, which I think is going to be important with whatever breed that you have. I don't know if it would be on my top 10 lists per se, but I can also kind of appreciate why it would be here. Number eight, German Shepherd explanation is, while loyal and intelligent German shepherds are highly active and protective, they require experience handling in early socialization. I have to say, I agree with the explanation. Would a German Shepherd be good for a first time dog owner?

It certainly wouldn't be my first recommendation. They can be a lot of dog and sometimes when dogs are really intelligent, if you're working with a very inexperienced person who isn't maybe giving information well enough, isn't providing good enough leadership, sometimes the dog is like five steps ahead of the owner and that can be problematic. German Shepherds obviously can be very fabulous in their roles. They are put in very important jobs with the police and bomb detection and all kinds of things because of all of their great attributes, but that does lead to having a dog in a family environment that can be a little bit more challenging. They are definitely loyal, which means sometimes they're not as super open to other people coming in the home, which maybe might not be the best family scenario.

They can be a little bit more on the protective side. They can be very easily stimulated by action and motions. If you have kids running around and doing things, they can be a little bit more high-minded about that. That being said, though, because of their intelligence and their workability, if you train them, they also can be really, really awesome dogs. But if I was giving advice to a new person, this would definitely be on my top 10 list as well as not a great choice for a very, very first time dog owner.

Moving on to number seven, the Shar Pei. With a strong-willed and independent nature, Shar Peis can be aloof and challenging to train. Often we're acquiring an experienced owner to manage their behavior. Again, I agree with this explanation, it's pretty spot on. Definitely aloof is actually, I would say the perfect word for them.

We haven't had a ton of Shar Peis in classes. I wouldn't say that it's a super common breed, but I think it's kind of for good reason. They are a little bit more of a challenging breed. A lot of the Shar Peis that I have come across in my experience, haven't been the friendliest dogs. They are a lot of dog and they can be a challenge to, that's definitely for sure.

They're not super motivated. I think it really depends on what you want the dog for. As a first time dog owner, typically I find they're chosen in situations where the dog's going to be more of a guardian dog, which I guess would be a better role. But if you're looking for a smooshy cuddly dog that you can get on the couch with or go for long walks on the beach, don't think Shar Pei is your guy. I think that you probably want to go in a different direction.

If somebody was to say, Hey, I'm thinking about getting a Shar Pei, I think I would immediately be like, Ooh, let's maybe do our research first. So I agree with this. It would definitely be on my top 10 list. I'm sorry for the Shar Pei owners out there. I think that to have one is to love one, but if we're talking about new dog owners that have no experience, I definitely wouldn't recommend this breed.

Number six, Dalmatian. The explanation is high energy levels. They have high energy levels and a need for ample exercise making dalmatians a demanding breed. Without proper outlets, they can become hyperactive and destructive. Yes, true dalmatians, they can be high energy.

I have seen a very wide range of energy levels. To me, the energy level wouldn't be the big thing that I would warn people about. It would more be that they are just like a lot of dog. They have a lot of presence. They're a little bit more in the independent side.

They can be a little bit more on the dominant side. Sometimes there can be issues with dalmatians in some people, but sometimes other dogs as well. Again, very careful about making blanket statements about breeds because I know people will go wild in the chat if they happen to own a dalmatian. It's like the sweetest dog in the entire world, and that could be true. But again, this list is about recommendations for first time dog owners, and I typically would not lead towards recommend or lend them towards a breed that is a little bit more on the stronger minded side.

So I would have to agree about this particular breed being on the list, not just for the energy level, but just more so about the fact that this dog sometimes has a bit of a presence. Remember, these are just my personal opinion and experiences based on the hundreds of thousands of dogs that I've seen over the years, but I really want to drive home to you that it's not necessarily about the breed per se. It's often about the match between the breed and the person. So whether you're a first time dog owner, whether you've owned 20 dogs in your lifetime, it's not just about the breed per se. It's about whether it's a good match between the person and the dog and that the energy level and the personality type goes along with whatever owner has that or whether they're open and willing to learn about what is needed in order to get success with that dog.

And that's the reason why we believe that every dog deserves training so that no matter what you're starting with, you can always work towards the dog fulfilling all of the things that you want them to do despite their breed. We never want to use breed and personality traits as an excuse for why a dog can or cannot do something. A lot of the time it's just about learning about how to unlock certain things for that particular breed so that you can get success because everybody has their favorites out there. But the truth is there's all kinds of fabulous breeds out there for first time owners or whatever it might be, but it does mean that you have a little bit of work to do. Okay, getting into the top five, coming in at number five is the Alaskan Malamute.

Now these dogs are bred for strength and endurance. Malamutes require rigorous physical activity and can be challenging due to their independent and strong-willed nature. Again, these explanations of the breeds are pretty spot on. In my personal experience that I've been around these dogs, I actually think that there's dogs lower on this list that I've already talked about that I think are worse than a malamute. So this would come at the bottom of my list is not as bad for a first time dog owner.

I think that these dogs, if you were thinking about getting one, this dog's choice and selection to me would be more about the person's lifestyle and energy level and kind of what they were going to do with the dogs. Yes, they can be independent. Yes, they require a bit of an exercise, but I've also seen some really lazy ones as well, like a Siberian Husky for example, far more energetic than Alaskan Malamute. They look kind of similar, not really, but same sort of genre, but totally two totally different dogs. We'll see if the Siberian Husky is on this list, but for a malamute, again, it probably wouldn't be the first one I would recommend, but I don't necessarily think it would be the worst in the world as well.

So I'm 50 50 on this breed. Number four is an Akita. Akitas are powerful protective dogs that can be territorial and aloof with strangers requiring firm and consistent training from an experienced handler. Check, check, check, check. I completely agree.

Akitas are a lot of dogs, I absolutely would not recommend this breed as to somebody who hadn't had experienced training dogs with good information. They can be a great dog for sure. I mean, but that's the same with all breeds. But Akitas are definitely big powerful dogs that have a lot of presence. They would require a lot of leadership.

They're not your easygoing happy go lucky family pet. That's not what they were bred for. So it definitely, it makes sense where this dog is sitting on this list to me. We're getting into our number three now. So coming into number three, we have the cane corso.

Okay, this is an interesting one. The explanation is this large muscular breed has a strong protective instinct and needs assertive owner who could provide proper training and socialization. Again, completely agree with this and I think this dog deserves to be on the not recommendation, the no recommendation list for new owners. These dogs are definitely a lot of dog, and if they are paired with somebody who hasn't had a lot of experience or doesn't have a lot of good leadership qualities, they can tend to be a little bit more on the problematic side. I have seen a lot of Cane Corso unfortunately, that have not great social issues towards people and more specifically towards other dogs, which isn't super fun to deal with if you are a brand new dog owner.

That being said, with any of the breeds on this list, we see so many of these breeds in our classes. We do have a wide range to get an opinion about, and for all of the bad ones that we see, we also definitely see some nice ones as well. I can think of a couple Cane Corsos that are very sweet and chill and willing and cooperative and have been wonderful family members, but I think that that's unfortunately not the norm based on what I've had experience with. So I personally would not recommend Cane Corso as a first time dog for anybody. Sorry, number two, Siberian Husky.

I actually made mention to the Siberian Husky earlier when I was talking about the Malamute. So Sibes are known for their high energy and escape tendencies. That's funny, which, okay, we'll come back to that. Huskies need substantial exercise and mental stimulation, making them a handful for novice owners. Okay, I can't say that I disagree.

This list is actually pretty legit if you ask me. Sibes known for their high energy and escape tendencies, that makes me giggle a little bit because what we know about people who come to us with Huskies is often they complain about the dogs pulling a lot or the dogs running away a lot. So it makes me laugh when I see escape tendencies. They're not dumb dogs, they're very quite clever dogs, and they do absolutely have a ton of energy. So that is correct.

They're very independent. I mean, think about what they're bred for though. They're bred to be on a pack attached to a sled running as fast as they fricking can in crazy weather, like they are tough, hardy dogs that are bred for one thing. Now that being said, can you teach a Siberian Husky to not pull on a leash and come when it's called reliably every single time? Yes, you sure can.

Is it harder than doing it with a Labrador or a Golden or a Border Collie? Yes. Yes it is. It is more difficult for sure because they just don't have that same willingness to please as some of our other more companion or working dogs do. Can they escape things?

Yeah, so can other dogs. My toy poodle can escape things as well because she's very smart. But yeah, I would not recommend Sibe for a very novice owner, but I dunno if I would say they're number two, I would put an Akita higher up, I would put a Shar Pei higher up. There's other dogs that I would probably have a higher on my list as an absolutely don't go, but maybe it does deserve to be on the list, but it's not the worst, it's not the greatest. I love, I'm in the middle right now, sorry, hu Husky owners.

I would love to know what your thoughts are on this top 10 list. I would love to know whether you agree, whether you're shocked by anything that is on this list. Let me know in the comments below. The other thing I'd be curious about is if you are a first time owner, first time dog owner or were, and you had any of the breeds that I've talked about as your very first dog, let us know what your experience is like. Do you agree with the things that we said?

Did you have the most magical experience and that what we said is totally wrong? I'd be curious to know. So make sure you comment that below. Okay, number one on this list of the dog that should never go to a novice person or a brand new dog owner. Number one is the Border Collie, and if you know me, you're going to know why.

I'm going to have very mixed feelings about this, and I'll explain that in a second. But the explanation that's on this list says, extremely intelligent and energetic, correct. Border collies require constant mental and physical activity kind of correct. Without it, they can develop behavioral problems making them unsuitable for first time dog owners, honestly, correct. Now, here's where I have sort of a hard thing with this is coming from my position.

I am not a first time dog owner. I have owned probably over 20 dogs in my lifetime. I know I look super young, but I actually have a lot of dogs. A lot of them have been Border Collies. In fact, I mentioned earlier that my parents started with Airedale Terriers and then they ended up getting a border collie way back when, and that was an entirely different experience for them.

Now, it wasn't first time dog owner. They had sort of earned their dog training stripes with a harder breed like a terrier, and then moving to a border collie. It was just like a walk in the park. I do agree that if you've never had a dog before, if you get a Border Collie, you would absolutely need to know what you're in for. They are extremely smart.

They can run circles mentally and physically around people who don't really know what they're doing, and that can lead to problems such as them hurting things that're not supposed to, chasing vacuums, going nuts. When you turn the blender on getting stimmed with shadows on the walls and things like that, they can tend to be a lot of dogs. So if you don't have a way to give them an outlet both mentally and physically, yes, I would have to say that I agree with this. I wouldn't necessarily say, yeah, border collies are awesome. You should get them as if you've never had a dog before.

Would I make them number one? No, but that's because I have an emotional attachment to a border Collie. I've had many of them, and I know from personal experience after having border Collies for years is that when they do have exercise, when they do have good training, I have many breeds in my house currently at the moment, and my border collies are by far the easiest to live with in my home. You barely even know where they are sometimes because they're off sleeping underneath a chair like minding their own business. But my dogs get a ton of exercise.

They play agility, they go on hikes, they get lots of stimulation, and then they come home and they truly just chill out. They are wonderful to live with. Now you might hear me talking about the border collie and think like, oh, well she loves them, so I should go out and get one. Before you do that, do your research, make sure that you're ready to put the work into a border collie that they deserve. But I think that they're one of the best breeds out there for sure, but I have a much different perspective.

I'm not a first time dog owner. I'm an experienced dog trainer, which is why I love them so much, and I probably will have one for the rest of my life until the day that I die. But should it be on the list? Yes. Should it be number one that hurts a little, and I'm sure those of you who have any of the breeds that I've mentioned before, probably don't love to see that your breed is on the list because once we have a breed and we fall in love with it, we only want to think good things.

But if we're thinking about dogs, that would be a good fit for somebody who's brand new to having a dog that's not really had a lot of experience. I would have to say that I agree with this list and it would be important to kind of know what you're getting into before you get there. So there's actually three breeds that were not mentioned on this list that I feel probably could have a place, and these breeds are all breeds that if I see a class list and the breeds on them, I automatically go, I wonder how this is going to go. So the first one would be... we shouldn't have to train your dog alone, and that's exactly why we've developed programs that you can take with us both in person and online.

That way you'll never have to question anything else in your dog training. Now, if you're ready for support like that, you can join us and the thousands of dog owners that have made a commitment to have a well-behaved four-legged family member, the first one would be a Vizsla or Pointer. Now, I have seen a lot of really, really cool vizslas pointers, anything like that, but I also know that these dogs have a crazy amount of energy and sometimes when people come in with them that don't really have a lot of experience, the dogs are doing circles around them and are just absolutely insane, and you can be like, whoa, that's a lot of dog for that person. Now, I would say that with training eventually halfway through the program by the end of the program, the dog and human that you see together is so much different than when they first come in, but definitely they can be on the more energetic side and can be challenging for people. So I don't necessarily think that they should be on the list per se, but maybe honorable mention as just like a heads up, make sure that you know what you're getting into before you get either one of those breeds, but know that it can work out pretty good.

Another breed that I think probably should or could be on the list, kind of similar to the Shar Pei would be Shiba Inu. Again, these dogs not as common, but a lot of them that I have seen have not been very friendly. They can be, to be transparent. On the nasty side, I have seen the odd really nice one or the odd one that works like a million bucks and is absolutely like you think, gosh, if they're all like that, they would be so great. Typically speaking, they are definitely aloof and not, they can be really sensitive about handling people, touching them, that type of thing, and they could be quite nasty.

So I definitely would not recommend them as a first time dog owner. Again, I have seen a few nice ones, but typically speaking not on my recommendation list, that's for sure. And then the last one that I would probably say could deserve to be on the list, and this might be a shocker for some, is the boxer. This is one of those breeds that when we see it on a class list, we go, Ooh, I wonder how this is going to go again, because not because that they're a bad dog themselves per se, they actually can be a really fabulous dog, but for whatever reason, they always get paired with people who are very meek and soft and slow moving and passive, and these are big, powerful, busy dogs that need a lot of clear direction, and I think they look cool. People like them, they're a fairly popular breed, so then people end up choosing them and it's not always the best fit.

We've had lots of great boxers, don't get me wrong for sure, but sometimes if they come in and we see it come in with a sweet little old lady or something like that, we think, oh God, how is this going to go? Let's get a Gentle Leader on this dog right away. But yeah, depending on the person, they wouldn't necessarily be a dog that I would recommend you need to have a good human dog match for that breed, in my opinion. I mentioned the importance of training, so something you should know is we offer online classes and in-person classes and we train all breeds. We believe that any breed can be trained.

In fact, our methods work on all different breeds and personalities of dogs. That's the cool thing about McCann Dogs is we've been doing this so long that we have a ton of experience with all kinds of different breeds, and we're able to adapt to make sure that everybody is successful no matter the breed that you have. If you'd like to learn more about our training programs, check out the link in the description below. Also, if you're interested to hear my take on the top 10 most popular breeds, you can check out that video right there. On that note, I'm Kayl Happy Training.
