Available Puppies About Us Contact Us We are a licensed pet shop and grooming center in Singapore, established in 2016. Located at 46 Jalan Limbok, they specialize in ethical puppy breeding, cat grooming, and pet care. Available Puppies About Us Contact Us 46 Jalan Limbok Singapore 548728 (2min drive between Serangoon North and Serangoon Gardens 3min drive from Nex Mall) Opening hour: Thursday- Monday 11am-7pm Tuesday-Wednesday 11am-6pm We are open every day! © 2026 The Lovely Pets Available Puppies About Us Contact Us Cavapoos have a soft, curly or wavy coat that requires regular grooming to keep it clean, tangle-free, and healthy. The grooming requirements for a Cavapoo may vary depending on the length and thickness of their coat, but in general, they need to be brushed and groomed at least once a week. Brushing: Daily brushing is important to prevent tangle. Bathing: Cavapoos needs to be bathed every week in Singapore’s humid climate. Use a mild dog shampoo (we recommend Silky shampoo) and be sure to rinse thoroughly to avoid any skin irritation. Lastly, remember to blow dry to make sure the skin is completely dry to prevent skin issues. Trimming: Regular haircut is needed at professional dog groomer every 2-3 months for a full grooming service to prevent tangle and keep a neat appearance. There are many styles at your dog can try out to create many different look. Nail Clipping: The toe nails need to be clipped once every few months. Best to ask a professional groomer to do this to prevent bleeding when the nails are cut too close to the quick (blood vessel). avoid cutting too close to the quick. Teeth Cleaning: Brushing teeth daily is preferred, if not possible, weekly brushing is sufficient. Give raw bones regularly as enrichment which double as natural teeth cleaner. Ear Cleaning: Their ears may be prone to infection as it is dropping down which can trap heat and moisture especially in Singapore’s humid climate. Clean the ears with appropriate solution once a week. Here are some grooming requirements and recommendations for Cavapoos: Showing all 5 results Sorted by latest Cavapoo is a very popular designer dog which is a cross between Cavalier King Charles and Poodle. They are extremely in demand in Singapore as they have good looks and friendly temperament. Their hair is typically wavy hence do not need as frequent brushing compared to the curly hair of poodle. Yet when bred right, they are mostly non shedding which appeals to people with allergy. Cavalier temperament is also very kind and friendly. Hence the resulting mix create a perfect small medium size family dog. Whether you are looking to adopt a Cavapoo puppy or finding out the price, you can contact us to help you make the best decision for you and your family. Toy Cavapoo M (Rare 4 white feet) Cavapoo F Toy Cavapoo F Special Custom Breed/Color/Gender Order Tiny Cavapoo F Cavapoo is the very popular, designer crossbreed of a Cavalier King Charles spaniel and a miniature or toy poodle. They are extremely friendly to human, children and other pets alike. A Cavapoo is a terrific pup for first-time dog owners, families in search of an adorable playmate for children, or seniors who want an endearing companion. In addition, their fur is often hypoallergenic due to its poodle parent. While the Mayo Clinic stresses that no dog is allergen-free, some people might have less reaction to the proteins found in a Cavapoo’s dander, saliva, and urine. As Cavapoo are a cross breed, their fur can range from short smooth fur (like a cavalier king charles) to a wavy silky fur or a curly poodle coat. The latter two are especially popular due to their non shedding property. They are a medium size breed, typically weighing between 7-10kg, not too small and not too big! Their fur colour ranges from cream, to red, to brown to black which comes with or without markings. Cavapoos are very similar in looks and temperament to Cockapoos, with cockapoos as the slightly larger cousin. Small Breeds Medium Breeds Large Breeds Alaskan Malamute Bernese Mountain Dog Bichon Frise Border Collie Cavalier King Charles Spaniel Chow Chow Cocker Spaniel French Bulldog Golden Retriever Jack Russell Terrier Japanese Spitz Mini Goldendoodle Mini Pomeranian Mini Schnauzer Shetland Sheepdog Shiba Inu Shih tzu Siberian Husky Standard Goldendoodle West Highland Terrier Yorkshire Terrier